.TH DECLAN 1 "July 2026" "Declan" "User Commands"


.SH NAME
Declan \- Declarative Arch-based Linux system management tool.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B declan
.IR < operation > " [option]"


.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Declan
is a utility for declarative management of Arch-based Linux systems.
It is somewhat akin to NixOS's configuration, though it uses a JSON
file instead of a functional language.


.SH CONFIGURATION
Declan is configured in a JSON file structured as such:

.nf
{
    "description": "<user>'s <distro> configuration",

    "packages": [
    ],

    "services": [
    ],

    "gc": {
        "enabled": true,
        "include": [
            "~/*"
        ]
    },

    "rice": {
        "enabled": true,
        "remote": "user/repo",
        "include": [
            "program/"
        ]
    },

    "backup": {
        "enabled": true,
        "path": "~/",
        "include": [
            "~/"
        ]
    }
}
.fi


.SH OPERATIONS

.TP
.B init
Initialize Declan with a configuration in the user's home directory.

.TP
.B clear
Remove Declan's stored data from the system.

.TP
.B relay
Install newly added packages and remove delisted ones.

.TP
.B rebuild
Perform a system upgrade.

.TP
.B gc
Remove listed files and directories.

.TP
.B rice
Upload select configuration files to a remote.

.TP
.B backup
Back up listed files to an archive.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Display command-line usage information.

.TP
.BR -v ", " --version
Display the program's logo, current version, and license terms.

.TP
.B --gc
Perform garbage collection during
.B rebuild.

.TP
.B --casc
Iteratively attempt cascading removal of packages set for uninstallation.

.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
declan init
declan relay --casc
declan rebuild --gc --casc
declan rice
.fi
